clarify requirements on the base url (#240)
Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe: optimade.rst

**Identifier**
    Names that MUST start with a lowercase letter ([a-z]) or an underscore ("\_") followed by any number of lowercase alphanumerics ([a-z0-9]) and underscores ("\_").

**Base URL**

>     The topmost URL under which the API is served. See section `Base URL`_.

Author: This description can be a bit misleading, since (if I understand correctly), there isn't necessarily any API served under the base URL directly.

At the same time, I struggle to find a compact description that explains the actual meaning better.
One way to make things a bit more clear is to add an example here as well.
```suggestion
    The topmost URL under which the API is served, e.g. http://example.com/optimade/. See section `Base URL`_.
```

Reviewer: I'm not strongly opposed, but I also rather avoid bloating the text unnecessarily. Does adding an example here with no additional explanation really provide a benefit? Literally *any* valid URL can be a base URL, so how does the example help? The text is also directly followed by a link to the section with the full discussion about what a base URL is, where that same example appears.

Author: Yeah... I agree that the examples don't really solve the problem...
it's difficult to explain the "base URL" without referring to the versioned base URL first.

I'd just argue that it is the *versioned* base URL under which the API is served.
The base URL is simply the versioned base URL minus the version suffix.

Anyhow, I don't mind much going ahead with the current version.

**Versioned base URL**

>    A URL formed by the base URL plus a path segment indicating a version of the API. See section `Base URL`_.

Author: ```suggestion
   A URL formed by the base URL plus a path segment indicating a version of the API, e.g. http://example.com/optimade/v1. See section `Base URL`_.
```

Base URL
--------

Each database provider will publish one or more **base URLs** that serve the API, for example: http://example.com/optimade/v1.
Every URL component that follows the base URL MUST behave as standardized in this API specification.

> Base URLs SHOULD have the form :val:`<URL>/vMAJOR`, :val:`<URL>/vMAJOR.MINOR` or :val:`<URL>/vMAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All access to the API is provided under **versioned base URLs**, which append a URL component to the base URL that SHOULD be on the form :query-url:`vMAJOR`, :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR` or :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`. An implementation MUST provide the :query-url:`/vMAJOR` form, whereas the other forms are OPTIONAL.
```

.

> Here, :val:`<URL>` represents a generic URL, :val:`MAJOR` is the major version number, :val:`MINOR` is the minor version number and :val:`PATCH` is the patch version number of the standard implemented by the provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, :val:`MAJOR` is the major version number, :val:`MINOR` is the minor version number and :val:`PATCH` is the patch version number of the standard implemented by the provider.
```

For any major version supported by the provider, the :val:`<URL>/vMAJOR` URL MUST point to the **latest** minor/patch version implemented by the provider.

>     **For implementers**: Clients can discover the latest supported version of the standard by cycling through :val:`<URL>/v0`, :val:`<URL>/v1`, :val:`<URL>/v2` etc.

Reviewer: I don't think "cycling" is the right word here (it would mean re-trying them in a loop), and I still think the order should be by priority of the client.
```suggestion
    **For implementers**: Clients are recommended to discover the highest commonly supported version by the client and the API implementation by trying versioned base URL in order of priority, e.g., if major version 2 and lower are supported by the client, it would try: :query-url:`/v2`, :query-url:`/v1`, and then :query-url:`/v0`.
```

> Examples of valid base URLs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of valid versioned base URLs:
```

- http://example.com/optimade/v0/
- http://example.com/v0.9.1/
- http://example.com/v1/

> Examples of invalid base URLs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of invalid versioned base URLs:
```

- http://example.com/optimade/0.9/
- http://example.com/optimade/

Database providers SHOULD strive to implement the latest released version of this standard, as well as the latest patch version of any major and minor version they support.

> Note: The base URLs themselves are not considered part of the API, and the standard does not specify the response for a request to a base URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The base URLs and versioned base URLs themselves are not considered part of the API, and the standard does not specify the response for a request to them.
```

> However, it is RECOMMENDED that implementations serve a human-readable HTML document on a base URL, which explains that the URL is an OPTiMaDe base URL meant to be queried by an OPTiMaDe client.

Reviewer: I don't understand why this word was changed, so I revert it because "each" is more precise
```suggestion
However, it is RECOMMENDED that implementations serve a human-readable HTML document on each base URL, which explains that the URL is an OPTiMaDe base URL meant to be queried by an OPTiMaDe client.
```

Base URL
--------

Each database provider will publish one or more base URLs that serve the API, for example: http://example.com/optimade/.
Every URL component that follows the base URL MUST behave as standardized in this API specification.

If database providers choose to implement multiple versions of the API standard, they MAY serve them under the same base URL, followed by the version number prefixed with the letter "v".
Allowed formatting of the version are vMAJOR and vMAJOR.MINOR and vMAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, where MAJOR is the major version number, MINOR is the minor version number and PATCH is the patch version number of the corresponding standard.
If the major version number is 0, then the minor version number MUST also be included.

Examples of valid base URLs:

- http://example.com/optimade/, together with
  http://example.com/optimade/v0.9/ and
  http://example.com/optimade/v0.9.1/
- http://example.com/
- http://example.com/some/path/

Examples of invalid base URLs:

- http://example.com/v0, together with
  http://example.com/

> - http://example.com/optimade/0.9/, together with 

Reviewer 2: I kind of get where you want to go with the `together with` parts, but it seems very confusing and not well explained.
I would probably rather go for clean examples, and just list them, one by one, as was previously done. The base URLs don't pair up, they are each separate and their own.

Author: Happy for better suggestions!
However, I find the original examples confusing since they are not correct.

Author: One could e.g. just list them with commas

Author: I've introduced a distinction for a version-specific base URL, which also solves the issue with the examples, I believe.

  http://example.com/optimade/

> The base URL MUST serve the latest version of the standard that the provider implements.

Reviewer 2: What is the base URL in this case? I would consider `.../optimade` as well as the version-specific URLs to all be base URLs.

Author: Agreed. I will try to make this clearer.

The database provider SHOULD strive to implement the latest released version of this standard, as well as the latest patch version of any supported major and minor version.

> Clients can query for supported versions using the :field:`available_api_versions` field of the :field:`attributes` field from a query to the base URL :endpoint:`info` endpoint (see section `Base URL Info Endpoint`_).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients can retrieve supported versions using the :field:`available_api_versions` field from a query to the base URL :endpoint:`info` endpoint (see section `Base URL Info Endpoint`_).
```

Note: The base URLs themselves are not considered part of the API, and the standard does not specify the response for a request to the base URL.

> It is RECOMMENDED that the implementation serves a human-readable HTML document on each base URL, which explains that the URL is an OPTiMaDe base URL meant to be queried by an OPTiMaDe client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is RECOMMENDED that the implementation serves a human-readable HTML document on each base URL, which explains that the URL is an OPTiMaDe base URL meant to be queried by an OPTiMaDe client.
```

Base URL
--------

Each database provider will publish one or more base URLs that serve the API, for example: http://example.com/optimade/.
Every URL component that follows the base URL MUST behave as standardized in this API specification.

> 

Reviewer: As far as I can see, this PR removes the requirement that `optimade/vMAJOR` MUST refer to the latest MINOR.PATCH version supported by the implementation, and that `optimade/vMAJOR.MINOR` MUST refer to the latest PATCH version supported by the implementation. Should these requirements be dropped? Why?

(The top PR text mentions that there is no need for a client to perform URL discovery, but even then it makes a difference if an implementation is allowed to serve a prior minor version under `optimade/vMAJOR`)

Base URL
--------

Each database provider will publish one or more **base URLs** that serve the API, for example: http://example.com/optimade/.
Every URL path segment that follows the base URL MUST behave as standardized in this API specification.

> All access to the API is provided under the **versioned base URLs**, which append a URL path segment to the base URL that SHOULD be on the form :query-url:`/vMAJOR`, :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR` or :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`. An implementation MUST provide the :query-url:`/vMAJOR` form, whereas the other forms are OPTIONAL.

Author: ```suggestion
All access to the API is provided under the **versioned base URLs**, which append a URL path segment to the base URL that SHOULD be of the form :query-url:`/vMAJOR`, :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR` or :query-url:`/vMAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`. An implementation MUST provide the :query-url:`/vMAJOR` form, whereas the other forms are OPTIONAL.
```

Author: One could interpret "all access to the API" to mean that this sentence should also apply to index meta databases.
Could you please add a sentence (or half a sentence) to section 3.2 that explicitly states that meta index databases do *not* need to be served under versioned base URLs?

Author: Ah, I just fully read you previous comment - so, we *should* be using versioned base URLs for the index meta database (which is good).

Perhaps, could you then clarify in the opposite direction, i.e. although the section 3.2 only mentions "base URL", that access should occur via *version* base URLs?
I think this is not obvious from reading section 3.2

Reviewer: I don't understand the need to clarify this since there is no distinction between index meta-databases and regular databases in this respect.

I suspect any confusion about this mostly stems from having been exposed to our earlier (admittedly confusing) lack of distinction between various types of "base URL". But now "base URL" means one and only one single thing: the URL to which one adds a version number path segment to access API functions. I honestly think the type of clarification you ask for rather risk adding confusion since it sounds as if this behavior is somehow different for index meta-databases, which it isn't.

We anyway need someone else to approve this PR before we can merge. I ask them to weigh in on this before I make any change here.

Author: Ok, if others think this is clear, happy to withdraw this comment.

Here, :val:`MAJOR` is the major version number, :val:`MINOR` is the minor version number and :val:`PATCH` is the patch version number of the standard implemented by the provider.
For all major versions supported by the provider, the :val:`/vMAJOR` URL MUST serve the *latest* minor/patch version implemented by the provider.

>     **For implementers**: Clients are recommended to discover the highest commonly supported version by the client and the API implementation by trying versioned base URLs in order of priority, e.g., if major version 2 and lower are supported by the client, it would try: :query-url:`/v2`, :query-url:`/v1`, and then :query-url:`/v0`.

Author: ```suggestion
    **For implementers**: Clients are recommended to discover the highest version supported by both the client and the API implementation by trying versioned base URLs in order of priority.
    E.g., if major version 2 and lower are supported by the client, it would try: :query-url:`/v2`, :query-url:`/v1`, and then :query-url:`/v0`.
```

    **For implementers**: Clients are recommended to discover the highest version supported by both the client and the API implementation by trying versioned base URLs in order of priority.
    E.g., if major version 2 and lower are supported by the client, it would try: :query-url:`/v2`, :query-url:`/v1`, and then :query-url:`/v0`.

Examples of valid versioned base URLs:

- http://example.com/optimade/v0/
- http://example.com/v0.9.1/
- http://example.com/v1/

Examples of invalid versioned base URLs:

- http://example.com/optimade/0.9/
- http://example.com/optimade/

Database providers SHOULD strive to implement the latest released version of this standard, as well as the latest patch version of any major and minor version they support.

Note: The base URLs and versioned base URLs themselves are not considered part of the API, and the standard does not specify the response for a request to them.
However, it is RECOMMENDED that implementations serve a human-readable HTML document on base URLs and versioned base URLs, which explains that the URL is an OPTiMaDe URL meant to be queried by an OPTiMaDe client.

> 

Reviewer 2: Since we are doing release candidates and similar, we should probably mention in a note here that release candidates are versioned as its named version without the appendix, i.e., `1.0-rc` -> `1.0`, right?

Reviewer: You definitely have a point that this should be clarified.
